I got a sincere question from a viewer
about Buddhism and Buddhism is one of
many topics I cover here on my channel
before I even get to the question and
before I even get to why I would be the
person to answer this question well my
background is why this question was sent
to me in really broad brushstrokes we
can say that white people approach
Buddhism relate to Buddhism and convert
the Buddhism in a way that's
fundamentally different from Asian
people now these are broad brushstrokes
these are broad categories and some
people might rightly complain that the
category of white people does not
include for instance black people I mean
I'm not saying all Westerners but if you
do the research it's remarkable the
extent to which white people from Russia
really do relate to an appropriate
Buddhism in the same way as white people
from Scotland it's a it's a pan-european
pattern from you know California to
Eastern smolensk you tell me I'm now
gonna have to check in a map where
Smolenski
all right my girlfriend by the way is
not a specialist in Buddhism at all I
had her come on camera because she might
ask some the same kinds of questions or
much of some of the same I know
confusion as the person who wrote to me
asking well but broadly speaking white
people convert to Buddhism appropriate
Buddhism blade that wasn't getting
immersed in Buddhism thinking about
abstract concepts first as a philosophy
first and foremost as an ideology first
and foremost and they leave it to the
very end to think about institutions or
to think about management if you put it
that way if you really spend time with
serious Buddhists whether it's in sri
lanka or japan people who either are
buddhist monks themselves are aspiring
to come buddhist monks or any really
serious layperson whether they're a
scholar or otherwise he thinks the man
you'll find that asians who are serious
about buddhism across all of asia again
the difference reach real inca and japan
is amazing it's a huge diverse continent
demonstration scotland in some ways is
amazing but you'll find what they get
excited about is they know a particular
temple that has a good monk in charge
where the quality of discipline is good
with the conditions are and you know
it's it's no joke i mean and also they
talk about those things
they change like oh you know this temple
in the south of Sri Lanka it used to be
a good place to really study the Dharma
to really practice as a but his mother
but then some of the senior
administrators died and new monks took
over and now it's not good anymore
they really watch those things closely
and carefully so again this is a broad
generalization but already it sets up
you know the type of answer I need to
provide to this question if you are
concerned because a loved one a relative
a friend is converting to Buddhism or is
taking the further step of actually
becoming a Buddhist monk which is not
becoming a light person but joining the
religion at an elite levels is be
committing their life or committing some
years of their lives to to Buddhism it's
interesting because I think from an
Asian perspective the response to be oh
what temple what order who's his
preceptor like you know what's the
what's the chain of command and within
any one of those Asian societies people
who care about Buddhism people know
what's going on would be able to
recommend that he talked to a particular
monk that he look at a particular
location the last one I heard something
really positive about I opened this tab
here it was in Sri Lanka the great cloud
a temple if you want to search for it in
English the English name is the great
cloud temple and in modern Sinhalese
that's a Muhammad na wa I'm pronouncing
Sinhalese as if it were pally that was a
pal a scholar but it wasn't a modern
Sinhalese scholar um but it really was
kind of sincere excitement people
telling me what this temple and this
particular tell in particular when we
talk about the kind of diversity that
exists in Buddhism as a religion part of
it is because it's a very very ancient
religion and at any given time modern
traditions superstitions that exist in
the world today may have diverged from
the ancient tradition to an amazing
extent it's part of this way it is
possible for modern Buddhism to be as
different from ancient Buddhism as Santa
Claus is different from Jesus Christ
within Christianity there's no real
resemblance from modern Christmas with
Santa Claus and coca-cola and Rudolph
the red-nosed reindeer you can't open up
the Bible and find Rudolph the red-nosed
reindeer or the
to the the reindeer song I are there any
reindeer in the Bible at all are there
flying reindeer in the Bible flying
reindeer you know it can be that
different and now I have to follow that
up with a caveat that doesn't mean that
what's in the ancient text is completely
rational and philosophical and perfect
or that it doesn't contain superstition
it's a different superstition however
there is that kind of diversity within
Buddhism so if someone came to me and
right now that's the kind of question
I'm gonna answer someone comes to me and
says look my brother or my friend or my
son or my daughter or someone I care
about is converting to Buddhism or in
this case becoming a Buddhist monk
should I be concerned there's so much
diversity within Buddhism that you know
of course the easy answer is it's a yes
it's off it always helps to be concerned
you know uh but but it's true you know
people are not alarmed in the same way
that they're alarmed with a I wouldn't
be as alarm as it would be if someone
were even joined in the Catholic
religion let alone Islam or Judaism or
what have you but it's true there's so
much diversity within Buddhism that
immediately you have to press for it say
okay what what kind of Buddhism are we
talking about the person who sent me
this message mentions that she is an
atheist and she may or may not know ithi
ism is compatible with Buddhism now it
is completely false to say that Buddha
himself was an atheist or that the the
Buddhist monks who wrote the original
canon who were alive at the same time as
the Buddha and for a couple centuries
thereafter that they were all atheists
it's very clear the majority of them
believed in quite a variety of
superstitious things the existence of
demons and ghosts and heaven and hell
and reincarnation of the afterlife and
supernatural punishment for evil deeds
they will and they believed in
teleportation and super powers not so
different from comical characters like
flying through the sky like Superman
there's a lot of supernatural stuff in
the ancient scriptures and a lot of
people will never honestly say to you
but I just said you there's a lot of
dishonesty about that fact at all levels
their religion and all forms the
religion however the religion is
compatible with atheism you can be an
atheist and be a member of the Buddhist
faith you can be an atheist and be a
prominent Buddhist monk be a courier put
asthma
so to speak and of course that's not
true of Catholicism you can't really be
an atheist and be a Catholic priest or
Cardinal or something yeah can't get
very high up in the ranks of Catholicism
if you're openly saying you believe
there's there's no God and you say Islam
I think it's on this on the same page on
that what if not even more so I mean you
know a pistachio son that doesn't have
that kind of that kind of wiggle room so
that in some in some ways that would be
impressive to were shocking to Europeans
compared to the religions more Europeans
are are familiar with yeah
Buddhism has this core philosophy I can
I can say it to you right now from heart
to live is to suffer this is also
phrased as life is suffering this is
also phrased as all this is suffering in
reference to though all this being the
world you can see an experience around
you part two is there is no soul and
part three not necessarily in this order
by the way is that all is impermanent
right so all is impermanent in that
historical context meant very things
includes by the way that the gods they
believed in which are more like demigods
in ancient Greece that they also were
not immortal
so even the gods would die of old age
even the gods could go to hell after
they died interestingly so I don't I
don't know any other religion that's
like that I don't know another religion
which God can die and go to hell for his
sins but whether you think of them as as
gods or demigods you know gods like
Indra in ancient India they were seen as
eventually yes yes no you're right so
the most ancient period of Judaism
what's called first temple Judaism was
actually a polytheistic religion good
luck getting a rabbi to be honest you
thought that and that is actually still
recorded in the most ancient parts of
the Bible where there wasn't just one
God
many and yeah so the the role of angels
and archangels and that men giants
because the the ancient parts of the the
Bible have these other kinds of demigods
that are not so different from ancient
Greece and it has a Council of God
sitting together in the plural so yeah
there was this proto Jewish period we
can go first temple Judaism where the
idea of divinity and cosmology was was
quite a bit different and where angels
and archangels played a significant role
and were part of the fall from heaven
was that there were there was
interbreeding between angels and humans
giving rise to what you might call
Titans or I don't know some kind yeah
some kind of demigods so that's a whole
drama of gods that were with gods which
is again not so different from what you
get in polytheistic religions in in
ancient Europe and as you can imagine
there are a lot of Jews and Christians
who are very uncomfortable with that
that kind of evidence the Bible this is
another topic but you know still today
still in the normal King James Bible in
normal mainstream Bibles God does not
say of mankind let us make him in my
image he says let us make him in our
image thousands of pages have been
written about the use of the plural
there that it was that would that it was
referring to gods and the plural and
fragments of that this is jerk okay
anyway back back to back to Buddhism and
should you be concerned so good talk
with this in a shower level when it's
evident profound level I think I've
already alluded to the fact there's
tremendous diversity in what Buddhism
really is today in terms of what they
believe what they practice it does
include some of the most extreme and
terrible cult-like practices imaginable
if you just look around you can read
about Buddhist monks ordering their
followers to go out in the desert and
starve themselves and then people die in
you know I've read examples of that of
you know obscene self-harming meditative
practices where people stab themselves
or burn themselves and that also has a
long history that's not brand new it's
not part of the most ancient period but
it's not part of original or pure but
isn't what I want to say but we do have
more than a millennium of that that kind
of interpretation of Buddhism I mention
you an especially corrupt form nish ear
and Buddhism you know well that's way
out in Japan and so on yeah yeah so that
there is this diversity that can include
terrible and cult-like performs Buddhism
and you may ask how do you start off
with three such simple principles life
is suffering you know all is impermanent
and there is no soul how do you start
off with those three and end up with
these terror prices how do you start off
with the Bible and end up with Rudolph
the red-nosed reindeer it's a long story
you don't have you got two thousand two
thousand five hundred years of history
and a lot of people do kind of lament
that lament that Buddhism hasn't
remained true to its philosophical
moorings but on this shallow level yeah
you can easily get bogged down in the
details of what order and what kind of
practice it is I assume based on the
email I got that I am talking about a
modern white Western person not an Asian
person so they most likely are
approaching this conceptually where
they're starting with the philosophy
they're starting with the core beliefs
they start with the core ideas of
Buddhism some of them already mentioned
and then they're committing to that and
then they're citing okay I'm gonna deal
with whatever tempo I can deal with I'm
gonna deal with the management of the
tabla
they're leaving that until many stages
later they may even not be thinking that
much about the historical tradition or
the discipline the actual list of rules
you have to live by as a monk and how
they're enforced and other practice it
may sound like a joke now but whether or
not you're allowed to wear shoes matters
you know whether or not you're allowed
to only eat out of one bowl max you know
whether you're allowed to drive a car or
ride a bicycle you know for Buddhist
monks you know which which kind of
buzzing me signing up to these these
rules really restrict your your life in
some obvious ways both what the rules
are on paper and how they're how they're
really put in practice and obviously you
know there's living in celibacy and not
in the most strict forms of Buddhism you
are literally not allowed to touch money
so you have nothing to do with money you
don't have a bank account you never buy
anything you don't touch money if you're
really living by the code in the most
corrupt forms of Buddhism some of the
monks are billionaires and some of them
drive a drive a Lexus or drive a Ferrari
to drive expensive cars and they're
totally corrupt and they're actively
soliciting though
so yeah on that level on that level of
diversity however given that this is
basically advice for a you know a white
Western audience approaching this
ancient religion the question itself
named the issue of Nirvana and I think
it probably is on this person's mind the
concept of Nirvana is Nirvana real is it
something to live for it something to
die for or is it a reason to live by
this this discipline or what have you
now I've got to tell you so I haven't
gotten into my own background I was a
scholar of Buddhism for more than 10
years I don't want to get into a length
of if I tell you about what I did in the
more than 10 years I studied what is
them some much longer video but I have
met with and studied with some famous
monks and been to famous monasteries as
well as famous modern Western secular
scholars academics what-have-you I had a
really diverse deep background Buddhism
I've got to tell you from my perspective
no Nirvana is not real when you're
talking about Nirvana you're talking
about something which long story short
is the product of hallucination and it's
very clear I think reading the original
texts in the original language that what
you're reading are descriptions of
hallucinatory experiences and you can
read exactly how people induced it had
the solution to our experiences and even
the debates between monks because it's
not going to be consistent you know not
everyone's gonna have the same kind of
hallucination what their different
elucidation mean and how they relate to
this philosophy so already there you've
got a pretty good idea of the basis for
an ancient religion you've got a
monastic discipline you've got a
philosophy and then you also have a set
of what we now call meditative practices
but even you have to really stop on
question what do we mean by the word
meditation it's a very modern European
Western concept ultimately and we mostly
known as a Catholic concept and then
partly through ancient ancient Greek and
Latin sources a pataga meditation the
meditations of Marcus Aurelius that's
where the the word comes from however
you know we have these practices that
are linked to hallucinations which
include for example the flu sensation of
remembering your former lives
remembering your former incarnations so
for a lot of people that is a religious
experience under whatever conditions may
be starving themselves in City
in a cave then they induce this loosen
to our state and they see the thousands
of years in the past that they in the
past they were incarnated as this person
in that person they see the futility of
continuing the cycle of birth which very
explicitly this comics means of having
your own children of having sex and of
you know reproducing that way they see I
mean in classical the terms of classical
Buddhist philosophy at ethics and
cosmology they see that good deeds and
bad deeds lead to punishments in your
reincarnations whether that means going
to hell or sling bad happening to you or
being recruit being reincarnated as a
monkey or something being reincarnated
as an animal this this kind of thing
there is a cosmology and so on and in
very explicitly Buddhism both in ancient
times and today is based on seeing these
things many people forcibly misinterpret
those texts as if they're talking about
empirical experience all the texts talk
about seeing for yourself knowing these
things for yourself that's based on the
confidence that you will actually have
the solutions or experience you will you
will see these things and then you'll
believe and Buddhism very actively
claims that it's different from other
religions because Buddhism doesn't
require you to believe in things that
are unseen it doesn't require you to
have faith in supernatural things that
are unseen but that's very clear the
reason for that is that ancient
Buddhists were confident you would
actually see these things for yourself
and for most of human history human
beings thought they saw ghosts like you
know we see this in all cultures
including Europe people routinely saw
things like ghosts and demons you know
what they were actually seeing you mean
from my perspective I'm a nihilist you
know I don't believe in that stuff but I
believe human beings have dreams I
believe that hallucinations you know I
believe sometimes they over interpret it
you know seeing a shadow or you know
whatever it was they they really saw our
experience they put this sort of
religious significance on so
this is part of the answer the question
the other part of the question was
positively why would someone want to do
this already implicit in my what I've
said so far there are some reasons why
you wouldn't want to do this one reason
why you wouldn't want to do it is that
the vast majority of Buddhism exists
today is unbelievably corrupt that's how
hard you've been kind of alluded to
another is that the core religious
experience is hallucinatory and
incompatible with reality keeping all
the way real here people you know sorry
so you know no Nirvana is not something
you can attain or experience it's not
real it's a myth and most religions are
built on myths and I think we can say to
give Buddhism credit the myth of Nirvana
is probably more interesting and more
philosophical than the myth of Hercules
I'm if millions of people believe in a
religion for many years or in my opinion
the myth of Jesus rising from the dead
I'm not really gonna plan my calendar
around Easter because there's this story
or the myth of Noah and the Ark
I can't Belov that Christians just go
nuts without knowing the ark thing I
don't know why it's not that great a
story but I mean it's just a myth right
but let me tell you on the positive side
if you become a Buddhist monk again this
is across all traditions from Japan to
Sri Lanka um you can get a lot done in a
day if you're at a good monastery not
even gonna unpack what I mean by good
let's say heard a good monastery you
wake up every day at 5:30 in the morning
you maybe have one hour of chores to do
during that day things like sweeping the
floor cleaning the toilet but you don't
cook you don't worry about cooking you
don't worry about making money you don't
worry about what you're gonna do
tomorrow you don't worry about the
future you don't have worries you wake
up at 5:30 a.m. you're living this
totally sober
totally disciplined you know lifestyle
in a monastery that enables you to do so
if you're into poetry and historically
many many Buddhist monks were you can
study ancient poetry you can write your
own modern poetry if you're into
philosophy of course that would also be
rewarded you can study ancient
philosophy you can write original new
philosophy if you were into history and
archeology you know as a Buddhist monk
you know obviously the history
archaeology of Buddhism or of Buddhist
countries you could be pouring your time
and energy into that and although it is
not as common
obviously if what you're interested in
was humanitarian work whether that's
helping elderly people or children or
people starving or people in an area
destroyed by a by an earthquake whatever
those inclinations you have scholarly or
humanitarian you have an ocean of time
you have a great opportunity to devote
yourselves to those things entirely and
I've lived enough of that lifestyle I
mean remember we're living at one
Buddhist monastery in particular where I
would walk down the mountain to the
website to the library at the end of the
path so wake up in the morning when I
was first there I did it to attend the
morning rituals that they did a morning
meditation and chanting in front of the
in front of the statue that got
repetitive quick after a couple days I
think I just woke up and went straight
to the library you know I didn't say
that but you wake up you wake up early
you maybe have some trivial duties you
know in terms of cleanings up but you
can devote yourself to the life of the
mind to an unbelievable extent and still
have enough free time to become a master
of kung fu at that same monastery I
remember one little old man who picked
out the the wooden staff and was doing
you know kung-fu with the Rising Sun you
know as a lifestyle believe it or not
there's a lot that's appealing about it
including the enormous potential to do
positive and good things for people like
you know you read a Buddhist temple
someone comes in they're heartbroken
because they're their father just died
you know they're arranging for the
funeral you tell you people come in
because they're anorexic and they're
trying to get over anorexia are there
they're an alcoholic and they're trying
to quit drinking
people come in with all kinds of human
problems and there's that element the
same as being a pastor and Christian
there's that element hope you'll visit
us but sure whether it's on a scholarly
side or on a humanitarian side it is a
lifestyle supported by this religion
with all its superstition and all its
contradictory history
you know sometimes preaching
non-violence and sometimes
hypocritically preaching violence and
there's all kinds of contradictions and
problems mystery of Buddhism but this
question was basically this question
from a tea suppose
why would my friend choose to convert us
why would they commit to being a
Buddhist monk until they died even with
everything I've just told you in this
video I can think a lot of a lot of good
reasons I can think a lot of compelling
reasons why any person of substance
would choose to make their peace with
Buddhism to say okay I understand this
religion I understand what's wrong with
it what's right with it the advantage of
disadvantages and say this is the way
I'm gonna make my mark in the world
especially at a time when so much of
organized education and so many career
paths are just a ripoff you know
compared to taking the next eight years
alive and getting a PhD or even going to
nurses college or something but when you
combine this I've been to Buddhist
monasteries that are attached to a
teaching hospital where Buddhist monks
can actually study and become you know
for humanitarian work can become nurses
or paramedics what-have-you so even
that's not not mutually exclusive you
know but compared to so many career
paths if you want to make a positive
difference in the world this is when we
can get started right away and the only
price is your soul question yeah one of
my friends from high school
we don't really actually talk anymore I
just noticed that he recently converted
to Buddhism but he's not a Buddhist monk
so what are the benefits to just being
just yeah I mean you know the promise oh
so this is a white Western person right
well I mean not too long ago there was
this hilarious moment you know
livestream where I talked to Ryan from
happy healthy vegan so Ryan lives in
California is a Western person he
described himself as Buddhist but when I
asked him people what what temple are
you a part of many butts of what lineage
are you a part of I think I was said to
him like well what tradition you part of
his only answer was like the internet
you know he has no connection to a real
Buddhist establishment nobody that's I
think that's the step is you know are
you part of Buddhism as an actually
existing religion you know a some kind
of temple
some kind of tradition or you just
someone who read a book or read a lot of
cases read a bunch of stuff in the
internet and decided to start describing
yourself as as Buddhist but yeah there
are I mean there are for most it would
be the children advantages of being a
part of a church oh okay it's different
okay number one if you are a Buddhist
layperson you have to take a commitment
to non-violence seriously in terms of
the basic precepts a layperson
lives by one is total abstention from
alcohol or any you know any kind of my
older drug which should we already do
and you know it is it is hypocritical
Buddhism is not vegan
it's not even vegetarianism but there is
this incredibly broad commitment to
non-violence and the quite a few
professions are you know cut out from
the way I remember reading an email
wasn't to me it was an email sent to a
Buddhist monk that I got a copy of
Buddhist monks used to say he's got a
lot of email from his mugs it also you
can spend a lot of time writing email if
you're in that lifestyle you know but
and this guy was a was a small aircraft
pilot in northern Canada where we have a
lot of mosquitoes and he was taking the
Buddhist precept and all that serious
enough that he described going up in the
small aircraft and carefully bagging the
mosquitoes and black flies because when
you get up to a high enough altitude the
air thins out and these these insects
they drop to the ground they're not dead
they drop to the ground and nerve
because they can't keep they can't keep
flying yeah you put I know I know it's
touching and hilarious and you know
that's if you take non-violence
seriously that's you and he kept them
alive in a bag and then when the
airplane landed he went out the back
they are playing to open the bag and
they they flew through free right so I
mean you know if if you take
non-violence seriously if you take you
know some of those those basic concepts
seriously then yes it will change your
life you know but obviously we're living
in a majority Buddhist town and you know
I mean what we were recently in Thailand
I mean you know we were you know
downtown Bangkok Thailand it's hard to
see okay I can see I mean I have enough
years of expertise I can see the ways in
which that society is shaped by Buddhism
and downtown Bangkok it still is better
then and different than living in Saudi
Arabia I you know it's it really is
different than living in a Muslim
society so Buddhism has shaped
everything
however yeah yes
it's obvious the vast majority of people
who describe themselves as as Buddhists
don't take any of the presets
seriously and certainly I mean a lot of
them they can't even answer questions
when you ask about cosmology or what it
is they they supposedly believe in
so I'd say though one funny thing about
Buddhism for laypeople you know this is
a good question to ask it is a bit like
trying to believe in the religion of
Socrates try to believe in ancient Greek
philosophy in that you're definitely
confronted with it with a great many
things that are just so ancient nobody
can believe in them you know it's like
the world map that's in Buddhism same
thing with ancient Greece you know I
think their idea but what was the shape
of the world and you know like you
you're looking very similar integration
in the ancient Greeks talked about Mount
Olympus kind of being at the center of
the world and at the top of Mount
Olympus were the gods it's the same
thing in ancient Buddhism the middle of
the world is this giant mountain called
mount Sumeru and the gods live at the
top of the mountain and they have this
idea of the shape of the world and the
world is flat and there's this steam
coming up below the world and supporting
it and if you meditate him properly that
can cause earthquakes cuz the whole
world is floating and that's you know
it's they way it's just a really
genuinely ancient and this is really
2500 years ago in India this is how they
saw the world I mentioned on this
channel before they thought of the Sun
is something quite small in the sky so
Buddhist monks when they were flying
flying like Superman they believed a
Buddhist monk could fly through the sky
and touch the surface of the Sun with
his fingertips so I'm completely
incompatible with our view of the solar
system we view the Sun as something
enormous very far away there's even the
Sun is something quite close and
tangible you know that that birds could
could touch with their wings even you
know that was those their idea of the
Sun so there are a lot of things like
that which are outside of questions of
faith you know
people who read Socrates are Ariston
nobody asks well do you believe in this
there are all kinds of elements of
Socrates there's any any ancient Greek
philosopher that to us are just
preposterous they just reflect an
ancient attempt to understand what it's
like what is the world in the same way
so much the material it's outside of any
correct at any consideration of true and
false but at the same time sure I mean
this has a corpus of literature poetry
philosophy that people still find
beautiful and meaningful I think the
challenge for what is lay people long
story short is can you make this
philosophy in this tradition meaningful
in your life today the same way that a
director like a movie director would
look at a script by Shakespeare and say
how can I make this meaningful for
audiences today like a large part of
what's there in Shakespeare today people
can't relate to it's not real to our
lives you know people don't just whip
out swords and fight duels anymore you
know what I mean like there are a lot of
things have changed a lot of exhibits as
Shakespeare wrote you know a lot of a
lot of social and ethical considerations
but we can do it it's an artistic
challenge it's a creative challenge you
say okay this is still meaningful in our
life static Shakespeare a lot of people
read Shakespeare at funerals Shakespeare
gets quoted at funerals and weddings
well you know people take out a some
poem a Shakespearean quotation for all
the time right so in that same way I
think there's this challenge of taking
something ancient and you know applying
it to our lives today
and if you're serious about Buddhism
then you're serious about taking on the
challenge